# Privacy Policy

Mosaic Networks built the Babble Chat app as an open source app.
This service is provided by Mosaic Networks at no cost and is intended
for use as is.

This page is used to inform app users regarding our policies with the
collection, use, and disclosure of personal information if anyone
decided to use our service.

If you choose to use our service, then you agree to the collection and
use of information in relation with this policy. The personal
information that we collect is used for providing and improving the
service. We will not use or share your information with anyone except
as described in this Privacy Policy.

## Information Collection and Use

For a better experience while using our Service, we may require you to
provide us with certain personally identifiable information, including
but not limited to camera. The information that we request is retained
on your device and is not collected by us in any way. The app does use
third party services that may collect information used to identify
you.

## Log Data

We want to inform you that whenever you use our service, in case of an
error in the app we collect data and information (through third party
products) on your phone called Log Data. This Log Data may include
information such as your devices’s Internet Protocol (“IP”) address,
device name, operating system version, configuration of the app when
utilising our service, the time and date of your use of the service,
and other statistics.

## Changes to This Privacy Policy

We may update our Privacy Policy from time to time. Thus, you are
advised to review this page periodically for any changes. We will
notify you of any changes by posting the new Privacy Policy on this
page. These changes are effective immediately, after they are posted
on this page.

## Contact Us

If you have any questions or suggestions about our Privacy Policy, do
not hesitate to contact us
